---
order: 5
title: "RPC Part 3: Capability Exchange"
date: 2025-07-29 10:55:00 -0700
bg: white
color: black
excerpt: "Capabilities are a powerful modeling tool."
featured: "true"
---
# RPC Part 3: Capability Exchange
--------

## Intro
In the previous post we examined the phases of an RPC call's lifecycle and how they related to message ordering.  We saw
how non-sequential ordering was desirable in some cases, but undesirable in others.  Finally we proposed a rule,
**Interface Order**, for when dispatch order should match call order.  The rule supported developers' intuitions about
causal ordering and therefore increased the likelihood of code correctness.  In this post we will further refine our
ideas around ordering to a narrower and yet more powerful scope, and introduce a new concept called capabilities.

## Instance Order
In the [previous post][devlog-post4] we talked about using Interface Order to impose a total ordering on the messages
sent to a chat room embedded in a game lobby.  The ordering guarantees prevented undesirable reordering of either two
messages from the same user, or replies by other users.  For this discussion let's simplify this example by defining a
pure chat interface (without the game lobby parts).  This might look like:

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IChat
{
  Promise Chat(string message);
}
```

Assuming `c` is a `ChatProxy`, we can write code like:

```csharp
await c.Chat("Let's get going.  We need to:");
await c.Chat(" * Put gas in the car.");
await c.Chat(" * Drive to the event.");
```

(It might be unfortunate if those last two messages were reordered!)  

What if we want to support more than one chat room at the same time (perhaps with different groups of people, talking
about different things)? We'll need some way to indicate which chat room each message was intended for.  We could add a
parameter to the `Chat` method:

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IChat
{
  Promise Chat(int chatRoomId, string message);
}
```

This works... but has some _issues_.  How does the caller learn the id?  Who allocates the id?  How do you prevent the
same id from being used for multiple rooms at the same time?  When a room is destroyed, how to you reuse the id (so you
don't run out)?  During message dispatch, how do you find the data structure that manages that specific room's data?
How do you prevent malicious users from guessing the id of rooms they aren't a member of?  I'm sure you can imagine
solutions to some of these problems, but let's ignore them for now and look at how this interface might be used.  We
can now write:

```csharp
c.Chat(videoGameReviewRoomId, "Marymoor Studios [b]rocks[/b]!");
c.Chat(cookingRecipesRoomId, "No, the secret is to use half-and-half instead of milk!");
```

Interface Order guarantees that all calls to the same interface are ordered.  These are both calls to the `IChat`
interface.  But, do we really need our messages to the _Cooking Recipes_ room to be ordered with messages to the _Video
Game Review_ room?  Probably not.  It would be better if our ordering guarantees applied _only_ to the chat room, not
the entire interface.  We could define two different interfaces:

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IVideoGameReviewChat
{
  Promise Chat(string message);
}

[Eventual]
interface ICookingRecipesChat
{
  Promise Chat(string message);
}
```

Now we have the ordering scope that we want.  But this clearly won't scale.  We don't really want a static set of chat
rooms defined at compile-time.  We want the system to be able to be able to create (and destroy) new chat rooms at will,
but we still want to get ordering guarantees.  What we want is more than one **Instance** of the _same_ Interface.  Then
we could define **Instance Order** instead of Interface Order.  Instance Order says that calls are ordered if they are
made on the _same proxy instance_ (rather than to the same Interface).

If we had instances then we can go back to the original `IChat` design we started with above, but with two instances of
it instead of one.  We would have two proxies, each of which is of type `ChatProxy`, and we are able to simplify the
interface once again by removing those troublesome `chatRoomId` parameters.  We can write this code:

```csharp
await videoGameReview.Chat("Marymoor Studios [b]rocks[/b]!");
await cookingRecipes.Chat("No, the secret is to use half-and-half instead of milk!");
```

Now, we get _exactly and only_ the ordering that we desire.  All calls made on the same chat room are ordered, but calls
made to different rooms are independent.

## Capability Exchange
But, how did we get the two proxy instances to begin with?  The caller can't just create them because the callee has to
"know" which chat room each refers to.  The caller needs _the callee to provide them_ imbued with the proper chat room
association.  To make this possible our message passing system will need a new feature not yet discussed: **Capability
Exchange**.  Capability Exchange allows the payload of a message (including response messages) to carry a
**Capability**.

Like [Distributed Computing][distributed-computing], there is an entire field of computer science focused on studying
the design of secure systems through the use of **[Capability-based Security][capability-based_security]**.  A full
examination of capability-based security is beyond the scope of this devlog.  But for the purposes of our discussion we
can define a **Capability** as:

> **Capability**
> 
> A communicable, unforgeable, reference to a (possibly remote) object along with an associated set of access rights.

_Communicable_ merely means that it can be transferred (in our case through the message passing system).  The Capability
Exchange feature of our message passing system makes this possible.

_Unforgeable_ means that you can't create one without already having access to the object it refers to.  This implies
that there is **no way** for a malicous caller to create a capability reference to an object that the server didn't give
them. There are many ways to create unforgeable tokens (e.g. crypto, handle tables, block chains).  For our purposes it
is not important specifically how the message passing system implements unforgeable tokens, only that they _are_
unforgeable.

The _associated set of access rights_ means you can perform _actions_ on the object by using the reference.  In our case
each capability is a strongly typed proxy, and the Interface type of that proxy defines a set of methods, and the set of
methods are exactly the set of _actions_ that you are _authorized_ to perform when holding the capability.  A capability
is an example of what is referred to broadly as a _bearer token_ (prior to the term's popularity in HTTP and OAuth in
referencing a specific format).  A _bearer token_ has the property that just holding it (or bearing) is all you need to
be authorized to use it for whatever it allows you to do.  There are no other access checks, and the token itself is not
bound to any specific identity.  Authorization is controlled by deciding who to give the token to and who not to.  A
_bearer token_ is like a key that opens a door.  If you have the key then you can open the door, and if you don't you
can't, but the door doesn't know the identity of the person that opens it.

Lastly, the _object_ referenced by the proxy is a unique instantiation.  When the message passing system dispatches a
call it _implicitly includes a reference to the target object automatically_ (like the `this` pointer in an
[object-oriented programming language][oop]).  The object pointed to by a capability has 4 interesting characteristics:

  1. **Identity:**  
     It has identity.  That is, one object instance is distinct from any other object instance (even another of the same
     type).  This implies that each has its own memory allocation and so its own copy of any state variables.  Sending a
     message to one instance is independent of sending a message to another instance.

  2. **State:**  
     It has state.  The object closes over its own state variables, which can be accessed within its _actions_ when they
     are dispatched (via the implicit object reference provided by the message passing system).

  3. **Lifetime:**  
     It has a well-defined lifetime.  Once all references (including remote capabilities) to an object have been
     discarded, the object is no longer reachable and can itself be discarded.

  4. **Actions:**  
     It has a well-defined type whose specification is provided by the Interface that it implements.  The object MUST
     provide an implementation for all _actions_ that might be made on it through the capability (and subsequently
     dispatched by the message passing system).  As we saw in the post [RPC Part 1][devlog-post3], Promise RPC's code
     generator defines an `abstract class` from which to derive an implementation for each Interface.  An instance of
     this implementation `class` statisfies the contract of its corresponding capability.

Capabilities and their objects are a flexible modeling tool.  Multiple capability instances of the _same type_ can all
point to the same object, creating distinct unordered message sequences.  A single object can simultaneously be
referenced by multiple capabilities of _different types_ providing different sets of authorized actions (essentially
different _views_ or _projections_ over the larger set of actions defined by the whole object).  Capabilities can be
encapsulated where one capability targets another capability as its object.  This is a common technique for creating a
_winnowed capability_ (one with a refined or reduced set of actions) which can be subsequently transferred downstream to
a less authorized party.

If our message passing system supports Capability Exchange, we can define a second interface for our chat server:

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IChatRoomManager
{
  ChatProxy CreateRoom(string name);
}
```

This then provides more insight into the code we saw above:

```csharp
ChatProxy videoGameReview = crm.CreateRoom("Video Game Review");
ChatProxy cookingRecipes = crm.CreateRoom("Cooking Recipes");

await videoGameReview.Chat("Marymoor Studios [b]rocks[/b]!");
await cookingRecipes.Chat("No, the secret is to use half-and-half instead of milk!");
```

The `CreateRoom` method creates a new distinct `ChatRoom` object and then returns a capability to it.  The `Chat` method
dispatches a new activity which includes an implicit reference to the target `ChatRoom` object.  In Promise RPC, `Chat`
is an abtract instance method on the `ChatRoom` object that is called by the message passing system within the dispatch
activity.  The `this` pointer gives easy access to the object's state.

## Capability Arguments
In the above example, we created new chat rooms and then use their capabilities to send independently ordered messages.
But how do other members participate?  We need a way to give another user access to a chat room's capability. 

To explore how we might do this, let's define an Interface to represent an individual chat user:

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IUser
{
  Promise Invite(ChatProxy room);
}
```

Unlike the previous examples where a capability was returned from a method, the `Invite` method _takes_ a capability as
an argument.  Capabilities can be exchanged in either direction by the message passing system. Now we can invite other
users to participate in the chat rooms we created by passing them the chat room capability:

```csharp
ChatProxy videoGameReview = crm.CreateRoom("Video Game Review");
await alice.Invite(videoGameReview);
await bob.Invite(videoGameReview);
ChatProxy cookingRecipes = crm.CreateRoom("Cooking Recipes");
await bob.Invite(cookingRecipes);
await carol.Invite(cookingRecipes);

await videoGameReview.Chat("Marymoor Studios [b]rocks[/b]!");
await cookingRecipes.Chat("No, the secret is to use half-and-half instead of milk!");
```

Bob is a member of both rooms, while Alice and Carol are only members of one each.

## Object Id Comparison
How is a capability any different than a plain old object id (like the one we saw as the `chatRoomId` parameter in the
example above)?  Remember we skipped over a set of possible issues with object ids earlier.  Let's revisit those issues
and see if our capability solution addresses any of them.

  1. **How does the caller learn the id?**  
     The caller is given a capability through an earlier exchange.  In the above example, the `CreateRoom` method
     returns a capability.  Of course, `CreateRoom` could just as easily return an object id, so this is not
     significantly different.
  
  2. **Who allocates the id?**  
     Unlike with an object id, there is no program-visible number in the capability programming model.  Ids don't need
     to be allocated by the server.  The message passing system is responsible for keeping track of capability and
     object identities.

  3. **How do you prevent the same id from being used for multiple rooms at the same time?**  
     Again, with a capability design there is no program-visible id.  The server implementation doesn't have to do
     anything to ensure that a capability is unique.  The constructor for a capability takes a direct reference to a
     target object of the appropriate type.  So, only the server (which has direct access to the target object) can
     create a new capability.  Once created, capabilities must be passed around as part of a capability exchange.  The
     message passing system then properly associates that capability with its target object, _automatically_.  
     
     When using an explicit object id, the server would have to keep a table somewhere that lists all object ids in use
     so that when allocating a new id it would know not to allocate the same id to two different objects.
  
  4. **When a room is destroyed, how to you reuse the id (so you don't run out)?**  
     In a capability-based system the capabilities and the objects they reference each have a lifetime.  When a
     capability is discarded its reference to the target object is released.  When all of the references to an object
     are discarded then the object's lifetime has ended.  There is no object id to reuse, and a `ChatRoom` is
     automatically destroyed when all its members leave.  Additionally, capabilities are attached to connected sessions.
     When a connected session ends (i.e. because of disconnection, say, when one of the parties terminates), all
     outstanding capabilities on that session are automatically released.  In this way, capabilities cannot be lost or
     leaked, and their lifetimes are always bounded.  Capability and object lifetimes are tracked by the message passing
     system, _automatically_.

     When using an object id, however, the id itself is just a number.  Once passed from the server to the caller, there
     is no way for the server to track the subsequent lifetime of that number.  Did the caller store the object id in a
     memory variable, or drop it on the floor?  Either, the server must rely on the caller to tell them when they are
     done using an id, or the server must attach its own lifetime to the object (e.g. with a lease or a ticket) and then
     require the caller to periodically tell the server if the object is still in use (e.g. by renewing the lease, or
     acquiring a new ticket).  All of this adds complexity to the caller, the server's implementation, and the protocol.
     All of this complexity must be repeated for each application.  And despite this complexity, the lifetime bounds for
     resource use at the server will NOT be tight.  The server's lease will inevitably be _longer than_ the actual use,
     leading the server to keep resources around longer than necessary, reducing overall efficiency.
  
  5. **During message dispatch, how do you find the data structure that manages that specific room's data?**  
     In the capability-based system the implicit reference to the target object provides direct access to the object's
     state during message dispatch.  No additional bookkeeping is necessary on the part of the server implementation.

     When using an object id, the server would have to maintain a mapping between active object ids and their associated
     state.  This table could easily be combined with the table used for id allocation in (1) and id uniqueness in (2)
     and (3) above.  Table access should be very cheap, because the table would need to be consulted explictly during
     each dispatch to convert the object id argument into a reference to the associated state.

  6. **How do you prevent malicious users from guessing the id of rooms they aren't a member of?**  
     In a capability-based system you can only perform actions on capabilities that you hold.  If you were never given a
     capability, then there is no way to perform an action on it.  Since capabilities are unforgeable, there is no way
     for a malicious user to create their own copy of the capability without the server's involvement.  Members of the
     chat room are simply defined by those who were given the capability, while those who were not are not members.
     Guaranteed.

     When dealing with an object id, however, security is more nuianced.  An object id is just a number passed as an
     argument.  A malicious user could attempt to guess the right number (say by trying all of the numbers, or guessing
     randomly).  No guarantees can be made that a malicious user might not get lucky.  Some other security mechanisms
     should also be in place.  Perhaps the chat room could keep a list of all its members (i.e. an Access Control List,
     or ACL), and then check that list at the beginning of every call to the `Chat` method?  This check can be
     expensive, complex, and requires there be some way to accurately identify who the caller is.  An ACL thus converts
     the problem of authorization into the problem of authentication.  
     
     The capabilities-based design doesn't have any of these security problems.  We haven't even talked yet about
     authentication or user identity in our system, and yet we still have a secure system without them.

All in all, there _are_ ways to address these issues when using object ids, but capabilities provide elegant,
automatic, built-in, and highly efficient solutions.

## The Root Capability
In all of our examples above we always acquired a capability from a previous exchange.  This is starting to feel like a
Ponzi Scheme where future capabilities are paid for only by previous capabilities.  The dependency chain can't go on
forever.  Somewhere we must have acquired the first capability without an exchange.  We call this first capability the
_root capability_.  The root capability forms the root of a connected graph whose nodes are capabilities and whose edges
are the methods that transfer them.  We say that a capability X is _reachable_ in this graph if there is some sequence
of method calls from the root capability that eventually transfers X.  Once given a root capability, the set of all
reachable capabilities defines the set of all allowable actions that a connected party is authorized to perform.

In the message passing systems we are looking at, the first capability is received when successfully initiating a new
connected session.  The root capability is made available directly as a result of session establishment and doesn't
require any additional methods to be called.  This is the ONLY capability that is delivered without a method call.  All
other reachable capabilities MUST be obtained through some sequence of calls to either the root capability or another
capability returned directly or indirectly from the root.  Each party exports their own root capability to the opposite
party in a bidrectional session.  Either party may export the `Nothing` capability if _no actions are authorized_ in
that direction.

I'll talk more about the [MSC][MSC] Identity model to a future post, but its important to note that authentication
happens at session establishment (using a crypto exchange).  Each party to a new session has the opportunity to view the
validated authentication credentials of the opposite party *before* deciding which root capability to offer on the
session.  So it is possible that different sessions export different root capabilities based on the identity of the
connecting party.

## Example
Capabilities and capability-based security play a key role in pretty much all of our designs.  But to illustrate how
capabilities make it easier to write games, I'd like to revisit the game lobby example from the [previous
post][devlog-post4].  In that post we were concerned with message ordering as it related to game settings and the
settings' LSN.  Here we will see how capabilities play a important role in securing our multiplayer systems.  The game
lobby defines the following three interfaces (abridged here for illustrative purposes):

```csharp
[Eventual]
interface IGameLauncher
{
  JoinedPlayerProxy TryJoin(PlayerToken slot, ClientLauncherProxy client);
  
  // We talked about this method in the previous post.
  Promise TryLaunch(ulong settingsLsn);
}
[Eventual]
interface IJoinedPlayer
{
  Promise Leave();
}
[Eventual]
interface IClientLauncher
{
  Promise Launch(PlayerProxy player);
}
```

The first two interfaces are implemented by the game server while the last is implemented by the game client.  

When connecting to a game server the client is given a root capability that provides methods for enumerating the
available unlaunched games or creating a new unlaunched game.  When a game with open slots is selected, a capability to
an object implementing the `IGameLauncher` interface is returned.  A client can attempt to join an open game slot by
calling the `TryJoin` method and passing: (1) a `PlayerToken` which identifies the desired slot to claim, and (2) a
capability to an object which implements the `IClientLauncher` interface.  If the join attempt is successful, the server
returns a valid capability to an object implementing the `IJoinedPlayer` interface.  Only clients that hold a valid
`JoinedPlayerProxy` have actually successfully claimed a slot.  In this way, race conditions to join the same slot are
resolved.  

The `JoinedPlayerProxy` capability itself only authorizes the player to leave the game slot (by calling the `Leave`
method, or by discarding the capability).  But, if they hold the `JoinedPlayerProxy` capability until the game is
launched then the server calls the `Launch` method on the `ClientLauncherProxy` capability that the client provided
during the join attempt.  The server passes the `PlayerProxy` capability to the `Launch` method which authorizes the
player to play that specific game as that specific player.  All subsequent method calls on the `PlayerProxy` imply that
those are the actions of _that_ player for _that_ game.  No other security checks are needed on subsequent method
dispatches because _only_ those players that successfully joined a slot were given a `PlayerProxy`, and each
`PlayerProxy` uniquely refers to a particular game slot.

## Conclusion
In this post we talked about capabilities, capability exchange, and how both can be used to build secure, efficient, and
easy to use systems.  We gave some examples of how [Promise RPC library's](
https://www.nuget.org/packages/MarymoorStudios.Core.Rpc/) implementation of capabilities can be used to implement common
game constructs.

This is Part 3 of our look at the [MSC][MSC] RPC system.  In Part 4 and beyond we'll look at streaming with sequences
and bytes, and finally we'll see how channel lifetime relates to aborts and cancellation. Until next time, code on!

## Previous
Read the [previous post][devlog-post4] in this series.

## Feedback
Write us with [feedback][feedback].

## See Also
* [All Posts][all-posts]
* [Glossary][glossary]
* [MSC (Marymoor Studios Core libraries)][MSC]

[MSC]: https://github.com/MarymoorStudios/Core
[all-posts]: /devlog.html
[devlog-post3]: /devlog/2025-05-29-RPC1
[devlog-post4]: /devlog/2025-06-30-RPC2
[feedback]: mailto:feedback@marymoorstudios.com
[glossary]: /devlog/Glossary
[distributed-computing]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_computing
[capability-based_security]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability-based_security
[oop]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-oriented_programming
