---
order: 14
title: "Orphaned Computation: Clean Shutdown"
date: 2026-03-26 11:03:00 -0700
bg: white
color: black
excerpt: "A strong discipline around clean shutdown leads to more composable and reliable software."
featured: "true"
---
# Orphaned Computation: Clean Shutdown
--------

## Intro
In the [previous post][devlog-post13] we introduce Orphaned Computations and demonstrated how they can leak resources.
We also looked at how, due to unintended side-effects, they can cause a variety of safety hazards that may negatively
impact the correctness of our program.

In this post we'll take a look at some techniques for ensuring that all our activities eventually terminate, thereby
avoiding orphaned computations.  This is called _clean shutdown_.  Clean shutdown is a design principle that applies
hierarchically to each level of our software architecture from the simple class-based abstraction level all the way up
to the multi-machine distributed systems level.  Modules that exhibit clean shutdown are much easier to compose into
larger modules which also exhibit clean shutdown.  Modules lacking clean shutdown can _taint_ all higher-level
compositions making it difficult or impossible to deliver higher-level guarantees.

## The Halting Problem
In the [previous post][devlog-post13] we implemented an Active Abstraction (whose _buggy_ code appears again below, for
convenience).  This abstraction included a leaked background activity implemented by the `Read` method.  In this post
we'll try to develop some techinques for ensuring that background activities don't leak.  Before delving into some
suggestions and examples, I'd like to acknowledge that guaranteeing that all background activities terminate at the
appropriate time can be challenging.  This is essentially the problem of proving _if_ a program (i.e. the activity body)
terminates given the input conditions that should have signalled its termination (i.e. its end of lifetime conditions).
This sounds suspiciously like the [Halting Problem][halting-problem] which Alan Turing famously proved is _undecidable_
(at least in the general case).

This makes it difficult to prove through testing alone that our background activities will terminate properly.
Fortunately, we don't have to solve this problem for the general case.  We don't have to accept just any program, but
instead we have direct control over how the program under test is implemented.  That means we can both (a) change the
program to make it easier to determine the correctness of our termination logic, and (b) write tests with foreknowledge
of that program's logic to verify its specific termination conditions.  While I'm a strong believer in units tests in
general, _particular care_ should always be given to the unit tests of active abstractions to ensure proper verification
of clean shutdown.

There are diverse ways that background activities may become busy that prevents them in turn from processing their
termination conditions.  Keeping some of these in mind as we write background activities will help us plan for their
termination.  For example, even straight-line code can become blocked on IO, trying to acquire locks or mutexes, waiting
on event signaling, or awaiting the resolution of a `Promise`, `Tasks`, or other future.  Background activities commonly
contain loops, and so the loop condition and the loop invariant almost certainly play an important roll in termination.
The termination conditions should either directly affect the loop condition, or be combined with it.

Let's reexamine our _buggy_ active abstraction and then see if we can _fix_ it:

> **WARNING:**
> 
> The code below contains bugs!

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  private const int s_bufferSize = 10240;
  private readonly StringBuilder m_content;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_read;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_write;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_stderr;
  private readonly Task m_reader;

  public RedirectStdErr(StringBuilder content)
  {
    m_content = content;
    Win32NativeMethods.CreatePipe(out m_read, out m_write, default, s_bufferSize);
    m_stderr = Win32NativeMethods.GetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle);
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_write);
    m_reader = Read();
  }

  private async Task Read()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    while (n != 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    }
  }

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    // Put the original stderr back, and release our copy of the handle.
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_stderr);
    m_stderr.SetHandleAsInvalid();
  }
}
```

## The Flag or State Pattern
One of the simplest and most straightforward patterns to indicate that a background activity should terminate is through
the use of a boolean flag.  In C# this flag is often called `m_done` or `m_disposed` (if the abstraction is
`IDisposable`).  If the abstraction implements a [finite state machine][devlog-post9] such that termination is tied to a
terminal state of that machine, then the state member variable (e.g. `m_state` or `m_current`) can also be used in this
pattern.

If we were use `m_disposed` as a termination flag in our `RedirectStdErr` abstraction it might look like:

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  ...
  private int m_disposed;

  private async Task Read()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    while (n != 0 && Volatile.Read(ref m_disposed) == 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    }
  }

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    if (Interlocked.CompareExchange(ref m_disposed, 1, 0) == 0)
    {
      ... // Dispose stuff.
    }
  }
}
```

In this pattern, when its time to shutdown (as indicated by the call to `Dispose` here), we set the flag (`m_disposed`)
to a value indicating that the background activity should terminate (e.g. `1` in this case, because there is no
interlocked operations are `bool` variables in C#).  We then logically combine the loop condition with the termination
condition to guarantee that the loop will exit once `Dispose` has been called.

You'll notice that we are using `Interlocked.CompareExchange` and `Volatile.Read` here instead of a simple boolean
variable.  The memory-model in C# provides weak guarantees for non-volatile reads, so to guarantee that the loop
performs a true load on each iteration we must mark that explicitly as a voltile read (or the loop may never _see_ the
write by `Dispose` even though it has already happened due, say, to enregistering or optimization).  Depending on the
programming language you are working with, you may need be aware of its memory model and necessary memory barrier APIs.

This flag pattern is simple, efficient, and often effective.  This code guarantees that the loop will _eventually_
terminate after `Dispose` has been called, and everything else in the `Read` method is simple straight-line code.  So
the leak is fixed, the background activity will terminate, right?  Well, almost.

## Sequence Termination
A bug still remains in the code above.  What if the code hasn't even entered the loop yet, but is blocked waiting for
the first read?  The line of code right before the loop looks like this:

```cs
    int n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
```

And _that_ line contains an `await` which blocks on IO waiting for the first read from the pipe.  This structure roughly
corresponds to an entire category of patterns for background computation termination.  It is very common for a
background activity to read a potentially unbounded, usually ordered, sequence of inputs through some communication
medium (where inputs are produced either outside the abstraction or by the parent activity itself).  The _purpose_ of
the background computation is to process each input in turn until the end of the sequence is reached, and then to
terminate.  

In our example, the sequence is defined by the pipe which receives a series of strings written to the pipe via `STDERR`.
If we had told the background activity that the sequence was complete, then the background activity would naturally
know when to exit.  We _should_ have done this by closing the pipe's write file handle.  So an alternative fix to this
code might have been:

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  ... 

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    // Put the original stderr back, and release our copy of the handle.
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_stderr);
    // Close the pipe to indicate EOS.
    m_write.Dispose();
    m_stderr.SetHandleAsInvalid();
  }
}
```

Once we have restored the original `STDERR` handle, no further writes will be made to the pipe.  By closing the pipe's
write handle (`m_write`) we indicate that the input sequence is complete.  A call to `ReadBlockAsync` on the pipe after
it has been closed will return the value `0` (assuming all previous writes have already been read).  The loop will
eventually terminate when `n == 0`.  So the leak is fixed, the background activity will terminate, right?  Well, almost.

## Internal Cancellation
It is true that _most_ implementations of common sequence mediums (e.g. pipes, files, channels) WILL immediately abort
any pending async (overlapped) reads that are waiting at the moment the write handle is closed to indicate EOS (End of
Sequence).  However, this is not _universally true_.  Some sequence mediums DON'T provide strong guarantees for
termination signalling to _pending_ reads (even if _subsequent_ reads ARE guaranteed to complete immediately).  For this
reason, it is sometimes recommended to always include conservative timeouts on pending reads.   If a read times out, the
loop can explicitly check the termination condition (e.g. the `m_disposed` flag in the section above) and break out of
the loop if termination has been requested, otherwise it can simply reissue the pending read to keep waiting.  Though
they certainly have their uses, I try to avoid timeouts wherever possible as they can respond poorly to varying latency
conditions and complicate testing.  I prefer prompt and explicit signalling.

`CancellationToken` to the rescue.  In C# `CancellationToken` (like `tokio::sync::CancellationToken` in Rust or
`context.Context` in golang) provides for non-blocking, lock-free, cooperative, multithread-safe, asynchronous,
broadcast cancellation notification that composes well with the core libraries including the API `ReadBlockAsync`.  We
can use a `CancellationToken` (in place of `m_disposed`) in the internal implementation of an abstraction to signal the
need for termination.  

A better fix to our abstraction might be:

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  ...
  private CancellationTokenSource m_disposed;
  private CancellationToken m_cancel;

  public RedirectStdErr(StringBuilder content)
  {
    ...
    m_disposed = new CancellationTokenSource();
    m_cancel = m_disposed.Token;
    m_reader = Read(m_cancel);
  }

  private async Task Read(CancellationToken cancel)
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n;
    do
    {
      try {
        n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer, cancel)
        if (n != 0) {
          Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
          m_content.Append(text);
        }
      } catch (OperationCanceledException ex) {
        break;
      }
    } while (n != 0 && !cancel.IsCancellationRequested);
  }

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    if (!m_cancel.IsCancellationRequested)
    {
      // Signal cancellation (and dispose the source).
      m_disposed.Cancel();
      m_disposed.Dispose();
      // Put the original stderr back, and release our copy of the handle.
      Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_stderr);
      // Close the pipe to indicate EOS.
      m_write.Dispose();
      m_stderr.SetHandleAsInvalid();
    }
  }
}
```

The `CancellationTokenSource` created in the constructor will be used to signal our background activity to terminate via
the source's `CancellationToken` (passed to the activity as an argument).  Any pending calls to `ReadBlockAsync` are
_guaranteed_ to either complete or throw `OperationCanceledException`.  Regardless of whether the EOS signal from the
closure of the pipe's write handle, or the cancellation notification is _seen_ first by the background activity, it WILL
exit the loop and terminate.  The check against `IsCancellationRequested` in `Dispose` even protects this abstraction
against double dispose.  So the leak is fixed, the background activity will terminate, right?  Well, almost.

> Side Note: It is considered a best practice to provide an idempotent implementation of Dispose whenever it is not
> prohibitively expensive to do so.

## Async Disposables
Cross-thread communication (including flag sets, sequence completion, and cancellation notification) is both asyncronous
and subject to interleaving nondeterminism.  We have argued that the background activity will _eventually_ terminate,
but have not proved any strong guarantees about _when_ it will terminate.  If it takes a long time before it terminates
then it will continue to create the same potential hazards as any orphaned computation until it does actually terminate.

Let revisit our motivating usecase example:

```cs
void SomeOperation()
{
  StringBuilder sb = m_pool.Get();
  try {
    using RedirectStdErr _ = new(sb);
    if (!m_steam.ApiThatWritesToStderr()) {
      throw new SteamException(sb.ToString());
    }
  }
  finally {
    m_pool.Return(sb);
  }
}
```

We saw in the [previous post][devlog-post13] in the section [Unexpected Mutation][unexpected-mutation] that if the
background activity continues to execute after `RedirectStdErr.Dispose()` returns then the string value of `sb` could be
unexpectedly mutated by a stale background activity that had closed over `sb`.  For `SomeOperation` to be correct, there
MUST be a _strong guarantee_ that any background activities created by `RedirectStdErr` have terminated **before**
`Dispose` completes.

To satisfy this requirement `Dispose` MUST wait until the background activity has terminated **before** returning:

```cs
  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    if (!m_cancel.IsCancellationRequested)
    {
      ...
    }

    // Wait for the background activity to terminate.
    m_reader.Wait();
  }
```

Now, we know that the background activity not only terminates, but has terminated **before** Dispose returns.  Our
termination guarantees are strong.  Note that the `m_reader.Wait()` logic appears _outside_ the idempotency check.  If
it did not then we would not get consistent idempotent behavior.  Instead the first call would perform clean shutdown
and block until the background activity has terminated, but subsequent calls to `Dispose` would return immediately
WITHOUT the provided guarantee that all background activity had terminated.  This would be incorrect.

Only one potential problem remains.  The call to `m_reader.Wait()` will block until the background activity has
terminated.  But the background activity may be asynchronously busy waiting on IO and may not terminate until either the
IO completes or the cancellation notification arrives which could take an arbitrary amount of time due to interleaving
nondeterminism.  The thread calling `Dispose` will be parked until that happens.  To avoid this C# introduced
`IAsyncDisposable` (an async analog to `IDisposable`):

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IAsyncDisposable
{
  ...

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public ValueTask DisposeAsync()
  {
    if (!m_cancel.IsCancellationRequested)
    {
      ...
    }

    // Wait for the background activity to terminate.
    return new ValueTask(m_reader);
  }
}
```

If the background activity doesn't terminate promptly, then calling `DisposeAsync` instead of `Dispose` allows the
caller to yield their stack until the background activity has terminated.  When implementing `IAsyncDisposable` the
calling code is changed ever so slightly to use `await using` instead of `using`:

```cs
void SomeOperation()
{
  StringBuilder sb = m_pool.Get();
  try {
    await using RedirectStdErr _ = new(sb);
    if (!m_steam.ApiThatWritesToStderr()) {
      throw new SteamException(sb.ToString());
    }
  }
  finally {
    m_pool.Return(sb);
  }
}
```

Now, we are guaranteed that the background activity terminates.  And we are guaranteed that it terminates **before**
`Dispose` returns (or `AsyncDispose` resolves).  So the leak is fixed, the background activity will terminate, right?
YES!

## Conclusion
In this is post, we reviewed some common techniques for implementing clean shutdown and showed some gotchas to watch out
for along the way.  Not all gotchas apply to all situations, and each of the above patterns have their uses.  Use your
judgement.  Clean shutdown and clear lifetime semantics make code more composable and more reliable.  Without
discipline, we have nothing.  Practicing clean shutdown discipline enables you to code on!

## Previous
Read the [previous post][devlog-post13] in this series.

## Feedback
Write us with [feedback][feedback].

## See Also
* [All Posts][all-posts]
* [Glossary][glossary]
* [MSC (Marymoor Studios Core libraries)][MSC]

[MSC]: https://github.com/MarymoorStudios/Core
[all-posts]: /devlog.html
[devlog-post2]: /devlog/2025-04-23-Ordering
[devlog-post7]: /devlog/2025-09-30-RPC5
[devlog-post9]: /devlog/2025-11-26-FSM
[devlog-post13]: /devlog/2026-02-26-Orphan1
[feedback]: mailto:feedback@marymoorstudios.com
[glossary]: /devlog/Glossary
[define-activity]: /devlog/Glossary#activity
[define-orphan]: /devlog/Glossary#orphaned-computation
[halting-problem]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem
[unexpected-mutation]: /devlog/2026-02-26-Orphan1#unexpected-mutation
