---
order: 13
title: "Orphaned Computation"
date: 2026-02-26 11:03:00 -0700
bg: white
color: black
excerpt: "Orphaned computation can be a resource leak and a safety hazard."
featured: "true"
---
# Orphaned Computation
--------

## Intro
One of the most powerful tools in modern programming is the ease with which we can perform "background computation",
i.e. the ability to execute additional logic outside the primary flow of control.  Way back in our
[Ordering][devlog-post2] post we introduced the concept of an [activity][define-activity] and throughout this blog we
have highlighted many mechanisms for creating additional concurrent activities through constructs like threads,
coroutines, goroutines, tasks, or even child processes.  Almost all modern frameworks provide some mechanism for
creating concurrent activities, and many modern programming languages even include built-in syntax to do so simply and
easily.  This gives rise to A LOT of concurrent activities!

With all these activities running around, we can't be surprised by the emergence of one of the most common and most
pesky programming hazards: [Orphaned Computation][define-orphan].  Orphaned computation occurs when:

> **Orphaned Computation:**
> 
> A background activity continues to execute after its result or side-effects are no longer required.

There could be lots of reasons why an activity's result is no longer needed.  Perhaps the player cancelled the operation,
the player left the scene for another, the object being affected was destroyed, or the operation itself got stuck and
was restarted.  Whatever the reason, the background activity should have been terminated, but wasn't (almost certainly a
bug).  We can categorize orphaned computations into two broad buckets:

* **Benign**: activities that continue to consume resources, but don't otherwise negatively impact correctness.
* **Hazardous**: activities whose side-effects impact correctness.

In this post we'll take a look at some of the impacts of both kinds of orphaned computations, and then in our next post
we'll suggest some techniques for avoiding them.  In the interests of simplicity, I'll focus these post on activities
created using async tasks in C#, but the same principals will almost certainly apply, regardless of your language or
framework of choice.

## Active Abstractions vs. Passive Abstractions
Activities can certainly arise ad hoc during the execution of some logic (say, in the middle of and for the duration of
some method).  However, they often emerge during the implementation of some abstraction where their existence is
(rightfully) hidden behind the abstraction boundary.  The consumer of such an abstraction cannot know whether or not
background activities are executed internally - unless the specification says so.  Abstractions that contain background
activities are what we call **Active Abstractions**, i.e. those whose state can change independently of any direct
interaction through their public-facing interface. 

Contrast these with **Passive Abstractions** whose state is always completely determined by the sequence of their public
interactions.  Passive abstractions are more predicable and deterministic, making them easier to write and test.
Furthermore, because of their need to create background activities, active abstractions create implicit (or explicit,
depending on the framework) dependencies on the _mechanisms_ used to create their background activities.  This may
impose constraints on the concurrency or threading model they can execute within or introduce dependencies on libraries
or components that lead to compile-time and/or runtime dependency conflicts.  Even built-in language constructs, like
C#'s `async`, `await` and `Task`, can impose these kinds of implicit constraints.  For example, in C# awaiting within an
activity empowers the runtime (unless explicitly configured otherwise) to potentially resume the activity on another
thread owned by the threadpool leading to potentially _true parallelism_ and all the threading hazards that go with it
(requiring proper locking to address).

For these reasons, I always prefer to design passive abstractions _whenever possible_ and only resort to active
abstractions when absolutely necessary.  Nevertheless, there are many powerful use cases for active abstractions, and
they are very common.

Let's look at an example of a simple active abstraction:

> **WARNING:**
> 
> The code below contains bugs!

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  private const int s_bufferSize = 10240;
  private readonly StringBuilder m_content;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_read;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_write;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_stderr;
  private readonly Task m_reader;

  public RedirectStdErr(StringBuilder content)
  {
    m_content = content;
    Win32NativeMethods.CreatePipe(out m_read, out m_write, default, s_bufferSize);
    m_stderr = Win32NativeMethods.GetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle);
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_write);
    m_reader = Read();
  }

  private async Task Read()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    while (n != 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    }
  }

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    // Put the original stderr back, and release our copy of the handle.
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_stderr);
    m_write.Dispose();
    m_stderr.Dispose();
  }
}
```

This abstraction creates a simple object that redirects into a `StringBuilder` any text written to `STDERR` for the
duration of its lifetime.  (I use a version of this class in my Steamworks library because, for reasons not entirely
clear to me, some Steamworks APIs provide their failure diagnostics _only_ as text written to `STDERR` instead of, say,
returning a string or error code, go figure!).  You might use this abstraction like this:

```cs
void SomeOperation()
{
  StringBuilder sb = m_pool.Get();
  try {
    using RedirectStdErr _ = new(sb);
    if (!m_steam.ApiThatWritesToStderr()) {
      throw new SteamException(sb.ToString());
    }
  }
  finally {
    m_pool.Return(sb);
  }
}
```

This abstraction is an active one because the amount of diagnostic string data written to `STDERR` is unknown a priori.
There is no way to guarantee that the buffer allocated to the `Pipe` will be sufficient to hold it.  If the pipe buffer
is not big enough then writes to `STDERR` (say, through `Console.Error.WriteLine()`) will block until the pipe is read
to free up space.  Liveness requires that the pipe be read and written to concurrently to avoid a stall. The background
activity within the abstraction concurrently reads the pipe in a loop while the main operation executes (and possibly
writes to the pipe).  If the main operation fails, then the diagnostic data is collected and propagated through the
`SteamException`.

As written above, this abstraction orphans the internal background activity tracked by the field `m_reader`.  Each time
`SomeOperation` is executed a new activity will be created and then leaked.

## Wasted Resources
While benign activities won't corrupt your game logic they can still be a drag on resources.  They may lead to
performance issues, slow-downs, resource contention, and negatively affect gameplay, particularly for long running
playthroughs or server-side components that don't see frequent restarts.  There are four kinds of leaks related to
orphaned computation that I particularly watch out for.  An unaccounted rise in any of these could indicate the
presence of orphaned computation.

### Memory Leaks
The most obvious is memory.  Inherently background activities consume some amount of memory.  At the very least they
allocate a resolver for their result (i.e. the task in `m_reader`), but any additional state that is closed over by the
activity and whose lifetime is scoped to the activity's lifetime will also be leaked when the activity becomes orphaned.
In the above code a 10K buffer (see `s_bufferSize`) is allocated for the pipe.  This additional memory will also be kept
alive for the lifetime of the activity.  If the activity is leaked, so is the buffer.

### CPU Leaks
Another common impact of orphaned computation is wasted CPU.  A background activity that performs work that is never
used steals cycles from the CPU whenever it runs.  The above example doesn't waste CPU (because it performs an efficient
wait on the pipe reader), but _what if_ that abstraction also showed the user a progress indicator of the pending
operation.  Then the background activity might instead look something like this:

```cs
  private async Task ReadWithProgress()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    stm.ReadTimeout = 1000;  // once a second.
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n;
    do
    {
      try {
        n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer)
        if (n != 0) {
          Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
          m_content.Append(text);
        }
      } catch (IOException ex) {
        UpdateProgress();
      }
    } while (n != 0);
  }
```

This activity wakes once a second to call `UpdateProgress`.  If `UpdateProgress` is cheap then this might never show up
on a CPU profile, but each orphaned activity silently steals away a little more CPU.

### Constrained Resource Leaks
Constrained Resources are those that are inherently limited, usually due to physical scarcity.  Examples include things
like file handles, process handles, network ports, and (particularly in games) GPU memory.  Leaking these resources can
quickly lead to a stall, a crash, or otherwise odd failures.  The significance of constrained resources is that
subsequent failures more often than not occur in _some other part of the code_ when a legitimate use attempts to
allocate a constrained resources and instead encounters a failure.  Because of the lack of failure locality with the
root cause, and the potential for a random distribution of subsequent failures, these issues can be hard to track down
and fix.

In the `RedirectStdErr` example above, the `Pipe` read file handle is leaked.  The background activity owns the
`FileStream` object which appears in a `using-statement` at its top.  The stream will only be disposed (releasing the
pipe read file handle) when the activity terminates.  Because the activity is orphaned and therefore _never terminates_,
the handle is never released.  The handle can't be garbage collected (`finalized`) because the pending IO from
`ReadBlockAsync` will keep it alive.

If `SomeOperation` is called often enough then the process may run out of file handles.  After that, any attempt to open
a new file handle (e.g. to save a game) will fail with an unusual and unexpected error.  This can lead to very hard to
debug situations with random components suddenly failing in seemingly unrelated ways.

### Stack Leaks
The last resource I'd like to highlight as being uniquely leaked by orphaned computations is: _stacks_.  The
`RedirectStdErr` uses an `awaitable` method to perform its IO, and so does not park a stack, but not all IO devices
support async (overlapped) IO.  If `Pipe` only supported blocking IO then this activity might look something like:

```cs
  private void Read()
  {
    using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = reader.ReadBlock(buffer);
    while (n != 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = reader.ReadBlock(buffer);
    }
  }
```

Each running instance of this activity would park its stack while performing blocking IO (i.e. `ReadBlock`).  The cost
of a stack can vary greatly depending on the underlying mechanism (for example, goroutines might be cheaper than
threads), but they all have _some cost_ in both memory and scheduling overhead.  In some frameworks stacks are also a
constrained resources, e.g. a threadpool with a maximum thread count.   Exceeding the maximum stack limit can lead other
unrelated components to experience random stalls as they block waiting for a stack (or thread) to become available in
the threadpool.  The more stacks that are leaked the smaller the supply of available stacks the pool has to work with.
If more stacks are leaked than the application's minimum working-set stack requirements then the application may become
deadlocked, unable to make forward progress even though nothing appears to be waiting for anything else.

## Safety Hazards
While benign activities are a nuisance, not all orphaned computation is harmless.  When an orphaned computation closes
over state that is _still in use_ after the orphan's result is no longer needed then there is a high potential for
unintended mutation or side-effects that can lead to unexpected behaviors, malfunctions, crashes, or corruption.  Let's
look at a few examples:

### Unexpected Mutation
There is nothing more nerve-wracking in the debugger than observing a variable in the watch-window suddenly change its
value between steppings when none of the code you just step through changed it.  Where is this new value coming from?
"It MUST be memory corruption!", you think, as your stomach drops through the floor, because you _know_ that a memory
corruption bug will take _forever_ to track down.  Fortunately for you (_relatively speaking_), when you place a
breakpoint on _every_ line that sets that variable you discover that there _is_ an executed line that changes that
variable, it just isn't in a function that should _ever_ have been called at this point in the program.

Mutation caused by orphaned computation can be very surprising because it does not fall within the mental model the
developer has of the program's operation.  It is hard to reason about something that shouldn't be happening.  Closing
over state shared with other computation can be efficient and a powerful mechanism for communication, but when access
extends beyond its intended lifetime it leads to unexpected results.

In `SomeOperation` above, we allocate a `StringBuilder` from a pool to avoid memory allocations on this commonly used
object.  This is fine.  We waited until the operation is complete.  The `RedirectStdErr` was disposed.  The `sb` value
is no longer needed and can be returned to the pool.  Right?  The problem is that the Read activity was orphaned.  It is
_still_ running.  And it has closed over the `sb` object.  It can append content to `sb` at any time.  Its possible that
`ApiThatWritesToStderr` failed, wrote some data to `STDERR` and then exited.  At which time, because of interleaving
nondeterminism (see [Ordering][devlog-post2]), `SomeOperation` resumed and completed **_before_** the `Read` activity
read this data.  Suppose `sb` was returned to the pool, and then was immediately rented again by another operation to
format a string to display an enemy character's name.  Now instead of showing "Pirate Captain 2" above his head it shows
"PirateAuthentication failed.  Captain Check credentials2".  Well, that is _not_ right.

Interleaving nondeterminism is effectively a timing issue.  So this invalid behavior might _never_ be observed during
testing and only emerge later in the field after the game has been released.  Though this example produces only a visual
anomaly, it could just as easily be a mutation that has less obvious impact (e.g. erroneously reducing the player's
health), or lead to permanent corruption (e.g. mutate a list's size in the middle of writing a savegame file corrupting
the entire file).

### Stale Results
Orphaned computations don't only cause unexpected mutations, but they can also produce stale results and extraneous
signaling.  For example, consider `ReadWithProgress` above where it periodically updates progress while an operation is
running.  Suppose progress is updated in the UI by raising a signal or an event (a very common decoupled communication
mechanism).  The signal handler sets the `Value` property of a `ProgressBar` control.

Now suppose that we cancelled the first operation after it got stuck at 20% and restarted it.  But `ReadWithProgress`
was orphaned and the first activity is still running, now concurrently with the second restarted activity.  Both
instances of `ReadWithProgress` compete to update the progress bar.  Due to interleaving nondeterminism the user sees
the progress bar bounce back and forth between the actual progress and the stalled 20% value.  Perhaps as `[10%,
20%, 50%, 20%, 70%, 20%, 90%, 20%]`.  Well, that is _not_ right. Where is that coming from?

### Unexpected Errors
Often the interactions that orphaned computation attempt with other part of the application lead to error conditions,
violate invariants, or otherwise produce faults.  Remember, these interactions are unintended and not part of the
architectural model of the program.  

What if the signal handler for progress updates validated monotonicity?  The superfluous 20% signals now throw an
`ArgumentException` on the UI thread.  How are these handled?  Is a nuisance dialog shown to the user?  Is the log file
filled with noise?  Are telemetry statistics corrupted?  Or does the game just crash?

> Side Note: monotonicity is often a _great_ invariant to assert, as it can cheaply catch many unintended mutations.

## Conclusion
In this is post, we reviewed some of the dangers associated with orphaned computations.  They can be the source of
resource drains, constrained resource exhaustion, unintended mutations and side-effects, extraneous signaling, and even
faults.  When creating background activities, particularly when designing active abstractions that may hide the
existence of their background activities, we MUST take extreme care to ensure that all activities terminate with proper
lifetime bounds.  What I call **clean shutdown**.  In the next post, I'll review some common techniques for implementing
clean shutdown that will hopefully help make our code more composable and more reliable.  Until next time, be diligent
to know the state of your background activities, and code on!

## Previous
Read the [previous post][devlog-post12] in this series.

## Feedback
Write us with [feedback][feedback].

## See Also
* [All Posts][all-posts]
* [Glossary][glossary]
* [MSC (Marymoor Studios Core libraries)][MSC]

[MSC]: https://github.com/MarymoorStudios/Core
[all-posts]: /devlog.html
[devlog-post2]: /devlog/2025-04-23-Ordering
[devlog-post7]: /devlog/2025-09-30-RPC5
[devlog-post12]: /devlog/2026-01-27-Layout1
[feedback]: mailto:feedback@marymoorstudios.com
[glossary]: /devlog/Glossary
[define-activity]: /devlog/Glossary#activity
[define-orphan]: /devlog/Glossary#orphaned-computation
