---
order: 13
title: "Orphaned Computation and Cancellation"
date: 2026-02-26 11:03:00 -0700
bg: white
color: black
excerpt: "Orphaned Computation can be safety hazard and a resource leak."
featured: "true"
---
# Orphaned Computation and Cancellation
--------

## Intro
One of the most powerful tools in modern programming is the ease with which we can perform "background computation".
I.e. the ability to execute additional logic outside the primary flow of control.  Way back in our
[Ordering][devlog-post2] post we introduced the concept of an [activity][define-activity] and throughout this blog we
have highlighted many mechanisms for creating additional concurrent activities through constructs like threads,
coroutines, goroutines, tasks, or even child processes.  Almost all modern frameworks provide some mechanism for
creating concurrent activities, and many modern programming languages even include built-in syntax to do so simply and
easily.  This gives rise to A LOT of concurrent activities!

With all these activities running around, we can't be surprised by the emergence of one of the most common and most
pesky programming hazards: [Orphaned Computation][define-orphan].  Orphaned computation occurs when:

> A background activity continues to execute after its result or side-effects are no longer required.

There could be lots of reasons why an activity's result is no longer needed.  Perhaps the player cancelled the operation,
the player left the scene for another, the object being affected was destroyed, or the operation itself got stuck and
was restarted.  Whatever the reason, the background activity should have been terminated, but wasn't (almost certainly a
bug).  We can categorize orphaned computations into two broad buckets:

* **Benign**: activities that continue to consume resources, but don't otherwise negatively impact correctness.
* **Hazardous**: activities whose side-effects impact correctness.

In this post we'll take a look at some of the impacts of both kinds of orphaned computations, and then suggest some
techniques for avoiding them.  In the interests of simplicity, I'll focus in this post on activities created using async
tasks in C#, but the same principals will almost certainly apply, regardless of your language or framework of choice.

## Active Abstractions vs. Passive Abstractions
Activities can certainly arise adhoc during the execution of some logic (say, in the middle of and for the duration of
some method).  However, they often emerge during the implementation of some abstraction where their existence is
(rightfully) hidden behind the abstraction boundary.  The consumer of such an abstraction cannot know whether or not
background activities are executed internally - unless the specification says so.  Abstractions that contain background
activities are what we call **Active Abstractions**, i.e. those whose state can change independently of any direct
interaction through their public-facing interface. 

Contrast these with **Passive Abstractions** whose state is always completely determined by the sequence of their public
interactions.  Passive abstractions are more predicable and deterministic, making them easier to write and test.
Furthermore, because of their need to create backbground activities, active abstractions create implicit (or explicit,
depending on the framework) dependencies on the _mechanisms_ used to create their background activities.  This may
impose constraints on the concurrency or threading model they can execute within or introduce dependencies on libraries
or components that lead to compile-time or runtime dependency conflicts.  Even builtin language constructs, like C#'s
`async`, `await` and `Task`, can impose these kinds of implicit constaints.  For example, in C# awaiting within an
activity empowers the runtime (unless explicitly configured otherwise) to potentially resume the activity on another
thread owned by the threadpool leading to potentially to _true parellism_ and threading hazards that go with it
(requiring proper locking to address).

For these reasons, I always prefer to design passive abstractions _whenever possible_ and only resort to active
abstractions when absolutely necessary.  Nevertheless, there are many powerful usecases for active abstractions, and
they are very common.

Let's look at an example of a simple active abstraction:

> [!WARNING]
> The code below contains bugs!

```cs
internal sealed class RedirectStdErr : IDisposable
{
  private const int s_bufferSize = 10240;
  private readonly StringBuilder m_content;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_read;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_write;
  private readonly SafeFileHandle m_stderr;
  private readonly Task m_reader;

  public RedirectStdErr(StringBuilder content)
  {
    m_content = content;
    Win32NativeMethods.CreatePipe(out m_read, out m_write, default, s_bufferSize);
    m_stderr = Win32NativeMethods.GetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle);
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_write);
    m_reader = Read();
  }

  private async Task Read()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    while (n != 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer);
    }
  }

  /// <inheritdoc/>
  public void Dispose()
  {
    // Put the original stderr back, and release our copy of the handle.
    Win32NativeMethods.SetStdHandle(Win32NativeMethods.StdErrorHandle, m_stderr);
    m_write.Dispose();
    m_stderr.Dispose();
  }
}
```

This abstraction creates a simple object that redirects into a `StringBuilder` the text written to `STDERR` for the
duration of its lifetime.  (I use a version of this class in my Steamworks library because, for reasons not entirely
clear to me, some Steamworks APIs provide their failure diagnostics _only_ as text written to `STDERR` instead of, say,
returning a string or error code, ewww!).  You might use this abstraction like this:

```cs
void SomeOperation()
{
  StringBuilder sb = pool.Get();
  try {
    using RedirectStdErr _ = new(sb);
    if (!steam.ApiThatWritesToStderr()) {
      throw new SteamException(sb.ToString());
    }
  }
  finally {
    pool.Return(sb);
  }
}
```

This abstraction is an active one because the amount of diagnostic string data written to `STDERR` is unknown a priori.
There is no way to guarantee that the buffer allocated to the `Pipe` will be sufficient to hold it.  If the pipe buffer
is not big enough then writes to `STDERR` (say, through `Console.Error.WriteLine()`) will block until the pipe is read
to free up space.  Liveness requires that the pipe be read and written to concurrently to avoid a stall. The background
activity within the abstraction concurrently reads the pipe in a loop while the main operation executes (and possibly
writes to the pipe).  If the main operation fails, then the diagnostic data is collected and propagated through the
`SteamException`.

As written, this abstraction orphans the internal background activity tracked by the field `m_reader`.  Each time
`SomeOperation` is executed a new activity will be created and then leaked.

## Wasted Resources
While benign activities won't corrupt your game logic (leading to malfunctions, crashes, or even corrupted savegames),
they can still be a drag on resources.  They may lead to performance issues, slow-downs, resource contention, and
negatively affect gameplay, particularly for long running playthroughs or server-side components that don't see
frequently restarts.  Typically there are four primary kinds of leaks to watch out for.  An unaccounted rise in any of
these could indicate the presence of orphaned computation:

### Memory Leaks
The most obvious is memory.  Inherently background activities consume some amount of memory.  At the very least they
allocate a resolver for their result (i.e. the task in `m_reader`), but any additional state that is closed over by the
activity and whose lifetime is scoped to the activity's lifetime will also be leaked when the activity becomes orphaned.
In the above code a 10K buffer (see `s_bufferSize`) is allocated for the pipe.  This additional memory will also be kept
alive for the lifetime of the activity.  If the activity is leaked, so is the buffer.

### CPU Leaks
Another common impact of orphaned computation is wasted CPU.  A background activity that performs work that is never
used steals cycles from the CPU whenever it runs.  The above example doesn't waste CPU (because it performs an efficient
wait on the pipe reader), but _what if_ that abstraction also showed the user a progress indicator of the pending
operation. Then the background activity then might look something like:

```cs
  private async Task Read()
  {
    await using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    stm.ReadTimeout = 1000;  // once a second.
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n;
    do
    {
      try {
        n = await reader.ReadBlockAsync(buffer)
        if (n != 0) {
          Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
          m_content.Append(text);
        }
      } catch (IOException ex) {
        UpdateProgress();
      }
    } while (n != 0);
  }
```

This activity wakes once a second to call `UpdateProgress`.  If `UpdateProgress` is cheap then this might never show up
on a CPU profile, but each orphaned activities silently steals away a little more CPU.

### Constrained Resources Leaks
Contrained Resources are those that are inherently limited, usually do to physical scarcity.  Examples including things
like file handles, process handles, network ports, and (particularly in games) GPU memory.  Leaking these resources can
quickly lead to a stall, a crash, or otherwise odd failures.

In the `RedirectStdErr` example above, the `Pipe` read handle is leaked.  The background activity owns the `FileStream`
object which appears in a `using-statement` at its top.  The stream will only be disposed (releasing the pipe read
handle) when the activity terminates.  Because the activity is orphaned and therefore _never terminates_, the handle is
never released.  The handle can't be garbaged collected (`finalized`) because the pending IO from `ReadBlockAsync` will
keep it alive.

If `SomeOperation` is called often enough then the process may run out of file handles. After that, any attempt to open
a new file handle (e.g. to save a game) will fail with an unusual and unexpected error. This can lead to very hard to
debug situations with random components suddenly failing in seemingly unrelated ways.

### Stack Leaks
The last the resources I'd like to highlight as being commonly leaked by orphaned computations is _stacks_.  The
`RedirectStdErr` uses an `awaitable` method to perform its IO, and so does not park a stack, but not all IO devices
support async (overlapped) IO.  If `Pipe` only supported blocking IO then this activity might look something like:

```cs
  private void Read()
  {
    using FileStream stm = new(m_read, FileAccess.Read);
    using TextReader reader = new StreamReader(stm);
    char[] buffer = new char[s_bufferSize];
    int n = await reader.ReadBlock(buffer);
    while (n != 0)
    {
      Span<char> text = buffer.AsSpan(0, n);
      m_content.Append(text);
      n = await reader.ReadBlock(buffer);
    }
  }
```

Each running instance of this activity will park its stack while perform blocking IO (i.e. `ReadBlock`).  The cost of a
stack can vary greatly depending on the underlying mechanism (for example, goroutines might be cheaper than threads),
but they all have _some cost_ in both memory and scheduling overhead.  In some frameworks stacks are also a constrained
resources, e.g. a threadpool with a maximum thread count.   Exceeding the maximum stack limit can lead other unrelated
components to experience random stalls as they block waiting for a stack (or thread) to become available in the
threadpool.  The more stacks that are leaked the smaller the pool of available stacks the pool has to work with.  If all
stacks are leaked then the application may become deadlocked.

## Safety Hazards
* Unexpected mutation.
* Unexpected errors.
* Stale results.

## Clean Shutdown
* Bool (m_isDone)
* Event signally
* Sequence loop
* Cancellation Token
* Async Disposables

## Exercise
As an exercise for the reader: try extending these concepts to service instance running in another Sip (i.e. on another
thread, another process, or another machine).  How would you guarantee clean-up across a network or RPC boundary?  For
some ideas check out our previous post [RPC5][devlog-post7].

## Conclusion
In this is post, we looked at a **Stretch to Fill** algorithm.  Algorithms like this help game designers build dynamic
UI that adapts itself automatically to different screen sizes and resolution while still remaining functional.  Even
when I plan on leveraging an existing layout implementation provided by my favorite game engine or framework, I often
find it useful to have an understanding of what is happening under the hood.  I hope this is useful for you too.  Until
next time, keep your head above water, and code on!

## Previous
Read the [previous post][devlog-post12] in this series.

## Feedback
Write us with [feedback][feedback].

## See Also
* [All Posts][all-posts]
* [Glossary][glossary]
* [MSC (Marymoor Studios Core libraries)][MSC]

[MSC]: https://github.com/MarymoorStudios/Core
[all-posts]: /devlog.html
[devlog-post2]: /devlog/2025-04-23-Ordering
[devlog-post7]: /devlog/2025-09-30-RPC5
[devlog-post12]: /devlog/2026-01-27-Layout1
[feedback]: mailto:feedback@marymoorstudios.com
[glossary]: /devlog/Glossary
[define-activity]: /devlog/Glossary#activity
[define-orphan]: /devlog/Glossary#orphaned-computation
